---
layout: post
title: "How to easily set up a Linux development environment on Windows using WSL2"
excerpt: "Linux is great for software development, but sometimes you're restricted to Windows. With WSL2, you can seamlessly integrate Linux into Windows. A guide how to use Debian for development on a Windows machine."
minutes: 4
seo_title: "Set up a Linux development environment on Windows using WSL2 and Debian"
seo_description: "Learn how to install and configure a full Linux development environment on Windows using WSL2. This step-by-step guide covers Debian setup, internet fixes, environment variables, and VS Code integration."
---

During my project work, I frequently found myself wanting a solid development environment on Linux. In my experience, it's much easier to manage, packages are easier to install and if I want to deploy my software on a Linux server later on, there's just much less fuzz. Also, Free and Open-Source Software (FOSS) for the win in general ðŸ§! 

However, my work computer was always restricted to Windows so far. I couldn't go the traditional route of dual-booting and running a full Virtual Machine (VM) on top of Windows seemed a bit counter-intuitive for me. No. I wanted to seamlessly integrate Linux tools and workflows into my Windows machine. To my surprise, this was possible using the Windows Subsystem for Linux 2 (WSL2).

## WSL2 vs native Linux
WSL2 is the updated version of WSL, a virtualisation technology that is a capable of running a full Linux kernel inside a utility VM on Windows. It essentially is a very lightweight VM without the traditional overhead. WSL2 is directly integrated in linux and is compatible with system calls. This sounds great, right? 

Initially, one of my main concerns was performance. However, it turns out that these worries were in vain. According to [Techradar](https://www.techradar.com/news/windows-11-wsl-2-is-almost-as-quick-as-running-linux-natively){:target="blank"}, WSL2 operated at about 94% of the speed of a native Linux installation on Windows 11 when combined with Ubuntu 20.04 LTS. Though, there is [some minor lag](https://www.phoronix.com/review/windows11-wsl2-zen4){:target="blank"} in I/O operations due to the added layer of virtualisation. But for development and testing, this shouldn't be much of an issue.

## Step-by-Step installation
Now, to the actual content of this article: How to easily set up a reasonable development environment using WSL2 on Windows? 

### Step 1: Make sure you have WSL2 installed
If you're using Windows 11 or any newer build of Windows 10, WSL2 should already be installed by default. You can check it by running the command `wsl --help` in a PowerShell terminal. If it runs successfully, then all good. If not, you can install WSL2 as described [here](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install){:target="blank"}.

### Step 2: Install a distro
Next, you need to install a Linux distribution that will act as a basis for your development VM. In my case, I used **Debian** as my go-to-distro. However, there are plenty of others like Ubuntu or Oracle Linux available too. You can check all distros available using the comment `wsl --list --online`. Once you have made a choice, you can install your Linux system using the command:

```powershell
wsl --install -d Debian --web-download
```

You can, of course, replace `Debian` with your distro name.

### Step 3 (only if needed): Fix internet connectivity
After installing and setting up the root username and password, you should be able to access your Linux VM by merely entering the command `wsl` in a PowerShell terminal. The first thing I always do on Linux is to update the software installed using `apt update && apt upgrade`. However, on some machines, I found that the internet speeds were horribly slow within WSL2. To fix this, you might need to adjust your nameserver settings by changing up your `resolv.conf` file as follows:

```bash
sudo rm /etc/resolv.conf
sudo bash -c 'echo "nameserver 8.8.8.8" > /etc/resolv.conf'
sudo bash -c 'echo "[network]" > /etc/wsl.conf'
sudo bash -c 'echo "generateResolvConf = false" >> /etc/wsl.conf'
sudo chattr +i /etc/resolv.conf
```

Again, this step must only be followed there are issues with the internet connection within your WSL2 system. I didn't encounter this issue on my newer Windows 11 machine.

### Step 4: Install required software and set environment variables
If you need environment variables that persist across sessions on your virtual Linux system, you can adopt your `.bashrc` file accordingly:

```bash
sudo nano ~/.bashrc
export VARIABLE_NAME=variable_value # add this line for each variable
```

Then save using *Ctrl+X*, close `.bashrc` and restart your terminal to apply the changes. Your environment variable should then be visible when typing `echo $VARIABLE_NAME`. 

You can also rapidly install Miniconda with Python by running the following chain of commands:

```bash
sudo apt install wget
wget https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
bash Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
```

### Step 5: Limit WSL2 memory usage
WSL2 can be a bit RAM-hungry by default. To limit memory usage and automatically drop cached files, you can create a `.wslconfig` file in your Windows home directory (that is, `C:\Users\<UserName>`) and fill it with the following configuration:

```
[wsl2]
memory=48GB
[experimental]
autoMemoryReclaim=dropcache
```

For context, I had 64GB of RAM on my machine available. Setting a 48GB cap ensures that WSL2 doesn't use more than I need and activates automatic memory reclamation. Feel free to adapt this number accordingly. `autoMemoryReclaim=dropcache` further enables the instant relase of cached memory if not needed anymore.

### Step 6: Start developing
To start developing, you can now connect to your WSL2 machine via Visual Studio Code's [Remote Development extension](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/remote-overview){:target="blank"}. It is even possible to connect from a remote computer to your windows machine *into* WSL2. Quite amazing!

## Done!
WSL2 with Debian on Windows provides an efficient development environment for my needs. I honestly believe that WSL2 hits the mark for anyone looking to combine Linux tools with Windows. It's best of both world, in a sense. Have fun!

Cheers!

David